### Why focus on methane?
Methane (CH4) is a powerful greenhouse gas - second only to carbon dioxide as a climate-forcing agent resulting from human (anthropogenic) activity. The growth rate of methane in the atmosphere is due to a complex combination of natural and anthropogenic emissions and natural removal processes.  The exact causes for observed changes in the methane growth rate over time remain uncertain due to incomplete data and disagreements between different measurement methods. Methane emissions and their causes at local and regional scales remain particularly uncertain. Additionally, methane is also being increasingly prioritized by California and other governments for near-term climate action given its relatively short atmospheric lifetime and the potential for rapid, focused mitigation that can complement economy-wide efforts to reduce carbon dioxide emissions.  Methane is also a precursor for tropospheric ozone and is strongly linked with co-emitted reactive trace gases targeted by air quality and public health policies in California. Finally, methane vented to the atmosphere from leaks in natural gas infrastructure – if not promptly detected and repaired - can result in costly product loss and (in sufficiently large quantities) a combustion hazard.  All of the above factors motivate the need for sharing methane data across a broad range of scales.   

### What about other gases?
Ammonia and carbon dioxide are just some of the gases that can be co-emitted with methane from some landfills, dairies, oil fields and power plants. The data presented here is limited to methane given our research focus on greenhouse gases. The California Air Resources Board (CARB) and Air Quality Management Districts monitor air quality and criteria pollutants in California. CARB and the US Environmental Protection Agency also maintain databases of self-reported emissions from large facilities in the state.

### What’s the difference between methane gas concentrations, enhancements and emissions?
The relative amount of methane in a given volume of air is often represented as the methane *concentration* (or more accurately, the dry air mole fraction).   For example, the current global average concentration of near-surface atmospheric methane on earth is about 2 parts per million (ppm). 

When methane concentrations in a localized volume of air are much higher than average background concentrations (methane in less polluted nearby air) we refer to that increase as the methane *enhancement*. For example, in the presence of a steady breeze, if a methane emitter results in localized concentrations of 10 ppm and the cleaner upwind air has an average background concentration of 2 ppm we would say that local enhancement is 10-2 ppm = 8 ppm.  Methane enhancements can also be represented by absolute mass units; for example, a localized enhancement might contain several kilograms of methane. 

An *emission* is the rate at which methane is generated by a source. For example, the emission rate for a venting gas pipeline compressor station might be 100 kilograms per hour (kg/hr) of methane, equivalent to about 5400 standard cubic feet per hour (scfh) of natural gas. 

### What are the different types of methane emitters?
An *emitter* (or emission source) refers to the physical or biological activity that generates methane gas.  There are two basic categories of methane emitters: point sources and area sources.  

We define a *point source* to be a condensed surface feature or infrastructure component (typically < 10 meters across) that emits plumes of highly concentrated methane.  Examples of point sources include individual pieces of natural gas infrastructure, oil wells, refineries, gas-capture systems in landfills, waste water treatment plants, manure management systems at large dairies and wildfires.  

This is in contrast to an *area source* distributed over a large area (typically 1&ndash;100 km across) that releases methane in a more diffuse fashion such as anaerobic decomposition occurring with rice cultivation and natural wetlands or enteric fermentation from livestock. Sometimes the cumulative effect of a large number of relatively low-emission point sources can manifest as an area source&mdash;for example, cities can appear as area sources due to the combined impact of many small natural gas leaks.

### What’s a methane &quot;plume&quot;?
A plume is simply the observed enhancement of methane in the atmosphere, originating from some emission source. This is analogous to smoke from a fire except in many cases methane is due to processes other than combustion. 

### Does a very intense methane plume (strong enhancement) mean there’s a large methane source nearby? 
Not necessarily. The magnitude of a localized atmospheric enhancement depends on both the emission rate and the degree of local ventilation. Wind speed is usually the biggest factor in ventilation but other atmospheric conditions and local terrain can also play a role, in some cases resulting in “pooling” of methane gas leading to large enhancements near a relatively small emitter.  For these reasons, when estimating the emissions from given source we account for both the methane enhancement and atmospheric factors like wind speed.

### How steady or persistent are methane emissions? 
Depending on the source activity methane emissions can vary by hour, season or even years.  For example, methane emissions from oil and gas infrastructure, refineries, power plants and manure management at large dairies are often highly intermittent on time-scales of hours due to normal operations such as periodic venting or flaring, but a malfunction or leak can result in persistent emissions. In other cases, methane emissions can sometimes vary strongly from season to season as a function of environmental conditions that effect methane producing bacteria (landfills) or by demand (residential natural gas consumption). Over time spans of several years we may see trends in emissions in response to mitigation (reduction) or new activity (growth). 

### Does the presence of a methane point source indicate a malfunction?
Not necessarily. Some methane emissions (often referred to as “process emissions”) are normal and are already accounted for in inventories and reporting systems; for example, incomplete combustion during gas flaring,  venting from vapor relief valves on gas storage tanks, small losses from compressors or area source emissions from landfills and dairies.  Examples of malfunctions include persistent venting or leakage due to faulty seal or valves in gas infrastructure or damage to a gas capture system at a landfill or dairy.

### Is this real-time data?
This is an experimental data portal. Most of the data shown here is based on measurements or data collected some months or years ago followed by several months of processing and analysis. Recent improvements in data processing and analysis tools have made it technically feasible to produce near real-time data however the primary limitation is funding for sustained and frequent observations. 

### What measurement systems were used to produce these data sets?
These data were produced by a combination of remote-sensing from aircraft and satellites and surface-based measurement networks. See info icons for each map layer for specific information. 

### Why do some areas show more methane sources than others?
Some areas have more methane sources because they tend to have more activity or infrastructure that lead to methane emissions or because those areas were sampled more frequently than other regions of California. When planning where to fly the AVIRIS-NG instrument, two of the main objectives were to fly over regions in California that have infrastructure or activity responsible for >60% of methane point source emissions and to fly over these regions multiple times so that intermittent emissions could be detected. 

### Why do dairies produce methane?
There are two main factors that cause dairies to emit methane: enteric fermentation and manure management. Enteric fermentation is a part of the digestive process for cows which causes methane to be expelled from the animal through burping. While enteric fermentation contributes to methane emitted from dairies, the methane emissions from dairies seen in Methane Source Finder are primarily due to a manure management technique involving the use of anaerobic lagoons to store animal waste/manure. 

### What are the biggest categories of methane emissions in California?
According to the California Air Resources Board (CARB), the majority of methane emissions in California come from agriculture (enteric fermentation 29%, manure management 26%), landfills (22%), and oil and gas extraction (16%). See the [CARB website](https://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/background/ch4.htm) for more information. 

### What is the difference between a plume and a source?
A methane source is a condensed surface feature or infrastructure component (typically < 10 meters across) that emits plumes of concentrated methane.
  
### Why do some of the Observation Methane Plume and RGB Imagery have black areas on their edges?
These areas indicate the edge of a flight-line acquired with the airborne imaging spectrometer.
